Let's explore the authentication filters in a little bit more detail.
As mentioned before, there are many flavors you can choose from,
like basic, digest, OpenID.
The authentication filter will extract the credentials from the
request and create an authentication request token.
Again,
many flavors of tokens are available to you depending
on your authentication strategy.
The filter then delegates authentication to an AuthenticationManager,
which will return an authenticated principal token to the filter.
Let's now take a closer look at the AuthenticationManager.
The AuthenticationManager actually delegates to one or more
authentication providers that do the authentication.
Again, Spring provides many flavors of authentication providers.
Generally though, you will only have one provider in your application.
But if you have multiple identity stores,
which is not that unusual in large organizations,
you have that flexibility to configure others.
The manager will try each one until it receives an authenticated token.
The interface for the AuthenticationManager is straightforward.
It has one method that accepts and returns an authentication token.
The authentication interface has a few more moving parts.
IsAuthenticated is self-explanatory.
It defaults to false.
And if set to true by the authentication provider,
the authentication was successful.
GetPrincipal returns the entity that can be authenticated, example the username.
GetCredentials returns the piece of evidence that the
principal has to prove its identity, like a password.
GetAuthorties returns the rights and powers of the principal once authenticated,
example the user roles, like admin user,
etc.
Now let's clean up some of the terminology and look at the
different stages the authentication token goes through.
Initially,
it is referred to as the authentication request as
it hasn't yet been authenticated.
The principal will have a username or any object that
identifies the entity being authenticated,
and it will have no granted authorities.
Once authenticated, it is known as the authentication principal.
The isAuthenticated method will return true,
and the principal will now return a UserDetails object,
which will encapsulate all the principal's identity details.
Credentials will be removed however as you don't want things
like passwords around for longer than absolutely necessary
outside of their identity stores.
And if you recall,
the authenticate principal will be stored in memory in the session context,
which will be persisted in the session,
accessible to any object in the current thread.
There is one more piece to this puzzle, and that is the AuthenticationProviders.
To perform authentication,
they need to retrieve the principal's details from an identity store,
like your database or LDAP.
And to do this, they use the UserDetailsService.
There are many flavors of this class,
like InMemory where the credentials are hard-coded in the
application code or a properties file, JDBC for database,
or a lot of the time,
you'll implement a custom UserDetailsService to perform
this task on your identity store, which we will be doing a lot of in the demos.
Once the provider receives the UserDetails from the service,
it will match the credentials against the request.
And if successful,
it will return a new authenticated token back to the manager
with the authentication flag set to true.
Credentials now and granted authorities populated.
The interface for the AuthenticationProvider has an authenticate method,
which accepts an authentication request and returns
an authenticated principal token.
It also has a support method,
which the manager calls prior to calling the authenticate method to check if the
provider supports the particular authentication token type.
The UserDetails interface has just one method that either returns a UserDetails object or throws a UsernameNotFound exception.